Reviews:
----------------------------------------------------------------

1AC review (reviewer 4)

  Expertise

    Passing Knowledge

  Originality (Round 1)

    High originality

  Significance (Round 1)

    High significance

  Research Quality (Round 1)

    Low research quality

  Recommendation (Round 1)

    I can go with either Reject or Revise and Resubmit

  1AC: The Meta-Review

    This work proposes new models that leverage copulas for pointing when users
                operate under different speed-accuracy strategies, but which take into
                account less optimistic models compared to prior work. While this
                approach has the potential to provide a significant contribution to
                the HCI community using an interesting approach, reviewers felt that
                the paper is difficult to understand and requires additional work to
                evaluate and validate the proposed model. Unfortunately, given the
                potential scope of work required to satisfy these issues, in
                discussion it was decided that one round of revise and resubmit (R&R)
                would likely not be enough. As a result, this paper will not be
                considered in the R&R round.

    To expand on the main issues discussed, all felt that the paper would benefit from
                clearer explanations and inclusion of intermediate steps to guide the
                reader in the body of the main paper itself. It is currently a short
                paper, however reviewers felt it was too short to properly explain the
                concepts and justifications and the inclusion of additional material
                would have significantly helped. I appreciate this is a complex topic,
                however all reviewers struggled to follow some of the topics and I
                think it important as many of the community as possible understands
                and appreciates this work. In order to evaluate and properly validate
                the proposed models, reviewers felt that the paper needs additional
                experiments and/or analysis that better reflect the situations that
                these models would be most applicable.

----------------------------------------------------------------

2AC review (reviewer 2)

  Expertise

    Knowledgeable

  Originality (Round 1)

    High originality

  Significance (Round 1)

    Medium significance

  Research Quality (Round 1)

    Medium research quality

  Contribution Compared to Length (Round 1)

    The paper was too short to address its claimed contribution.

  Figure Descriptions



  Recommendation (Round 1)

    I can go with either Reject or Revise and Resubmit

  Review (Round 1)

    Based on my understanding, this paper presents three contributions. 

    1. The paper proves proposition 3.1, which states that, theoretically, any
                conditional MT distribution will reach r^2 = 1 if the condition
                expectation E[MT|ID_e] is linearly related to ID_e. This highlights
                that researchers should use a method that associates the entire
                distribution (not just mean values across ID_e levels). That's where
                copula comes in.

    2. The paper introduces copulas to model the dependence structure between MT and
                ID. The benefit of using copulas is that one can specify any marginal
                distributions for both MT and ID while controlling how they are
                related.

    3. The paper presents a construction of three models to simulate pointing data and
                an evaluation of how well the model generates the data.

    Overall, this paper is quite difficult to read. I have attempted to outline the
                key contributions as I understand them, allowing other reviewers and
                the authors to identify if I have misunderstood anything. Along the
                same lines, I will also suggest several ways in which the authors can
                improve the paper's readability. On the bright side, when I tried to
                closely follow the arguments and proofs, I find the important elements
                and evidence that support the above contributions are there. While I
                am unsure of the CHI audience's acceptance of such work, the
                contributions are at least well-scoped.

    During the discussion phase, the reviewers found the revision may be quite
                extensive. Revising such a paper is challenging, as even the expert
                reviewers are struggling to fully grasp the ideas. Based on my initial
                view and the result of the discussion, I recommend revising and
                resubmitting or rejecting the paper.

    Below, I present suggestions based on the three contributions, followed by other
                important concerns.

    = The Proof in Appendix B
    I have carefully followed the proofs in Appendix B. In my understanding, they are
                (mostly) correct. One minor error is that Equation 35 should be
                -bE[Y]^2 instead of +bE[Y]^2. I assume it is a typo because the
                conclusion (Section 36) is correct.

    Another thing that I had trouble understanding is the linear standard deviation
                stated in Equation 32, that is, Var[X|Y] = (c + dY)^2. This literally
                means that the variance of MT given ID_e increases quadratically with
                ID_e. What is the supporting evidence for this assumption? I further
                wonder if this assumption is relevant to the proof at all. In my
                understanding, the proof should end at Line 1020. There is no need to
                discuss the extra term in r(X, Y) and later stuff further, which means
                Equation 32 is not even necessary.

    The proof is difficult to read, partially because the authors omit the
                intermediate steps to derive one equation from another. I suggest the
                authors add the rationale of the derivation. For example, in Equation
                25, E[XY] = E[YE[X|Y]] … (law of total expectation). And the law of
                expectation should be in another section of the Appendix for readers
                to refer to. Similarly, for Equation 26-28.

    The proof also uses phrases like "one notices from Equation 25 and 26…" "and some
                further algebra shows…" Just present the equations and be clear about
                what they mean. For example, the authors could provide COV(X, Y) =
                E[XY]-E[X]E[Y] = E[YE[X|Y]] – E[E[X|Y]]E[Y] and COV(\overline{X}, Y)=…
                to show how the "notice" makes sense. The point is that a reader will
                likely spend significantly less time than the authors used to derive
                the equations and may be less familiar with the discussed methods, so
                it will be helpful to make their job easier.

    = The Introduction and Application of Copula
    The authors claim to introduce copulas to HCI, but the explanations in the
                manuscript are too brief, and I had to consult other resources to
                understand them. To improve this, perhaps the authors could include a
                simple example that clearly demonstrates what copulas can achieve
                compared to other methods. Additionally, I believe Model 1 has the
                potential to do more than Models 2 and 3 because of the pros of using
                copulas. I would like to see an example that illustrates this.

    = The Evaluation of the Models
    The model construction and evaluation seem mostly fine. One note is that the
                authors claim between Line 706 and Line 707 that "all models produce
                data that closely match the metrics…" How did the authors quantify the
                data to be closely matched? Through absolute values? How close is
                defined as close?

    = Other Notes
    * The paper claims "ID_e" can only be defined after the experiment has been
                conducted. However, this completely ignores the related works that
                model spatial endpoint distributions from Grossman and Balakrishnan
                (https://doi.org/10.1145/1096737.1096741), Bi and Zhai
                (https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502058), to name a few. On the same
                note, more than 1/4 of the existing references are from the same
                group. This is somewhat questionable.

    * The paper should explain more about EMG models. For example, I am not sure why
                E[MT|ID_e] follows a simple condition mean where the exponential mean
                is \lambda * x, as in Equation 11. The paper should explain this in a
                self-contained manner. On the same note, I don't understand Equation
                17.

    * The paper only considers the dependence between ID_e and MT when manipulating W.
                However, D could also influence the dependence, as indicated by
                Grossman and Balakrishnan (https://doi.org/10.1145/1096737.1096741).
                Why are they not considered?

    * It is a bit strange to capture \overline{MT} and ID_e through a bivariate
                Gaussian distribution. First, movement time data itself is one-
                dimensional. Second, there is no clear evidence suggesting that it
                could be a bivariate Gaussian. Instead, the variance could be constant
                or skewed towards one side. Why not consider these alternative models?
                Furthermore, the authors claim that in the "Speed emphasis" condition,
                MT and ID seem to be uncorrelated. Have the authors used the correct
                distribution for these? Was it because of the calculated ID_e having a
                small range?

    * The paper is not suitable for the short paper category. It should be classified
                as a standard paper, as the appendix is essential for readers to fully
                understand the content.

    = Typos and Other Language Issues
    * Remove the word "comprehensively" from the sentence "to model pointing data
                comprehensively" in the abstract.
    * Correct "In thuis work" in Line 86-87. 
    * Change "iteration" to "replication" in Line 275.
    * Line 400, "may also be" what?
    * Line 515 should be Go datasets instead of JGP datasets. Similarly, for Line 521.
    * Equation 15 should be "…0.29S)" instead of "0.39"? Also, shouldn't the Equation
                be N(mu, sigma^2) instead of sigma?

----------------------------------------------------------------

reviewer review (reviewer 1)

  Expertise

    Expert

  Originality (Round 1)

    High originality

  Significance (Round 1)

    Medium significance

  Research Quality (Round 1)

    Low research quality

  Contribution Compared to Length (Round 1)

    The paper length was commensurate with its contribution.

  Figure Descriptions

    The figure descriptions are adequate and follow the accessibility guidelines.

  Recommendation (Round 1)

    I recommend Reject

  Review (Round 1)

    In previous studies on target pointing tasks, traditionally, movement time (MT) is
                point-estimated using Fitts’ law, or more recently, Bayesian
                hierarchical models have been used to estimate the distribution of MT
                based on individual differences and target condition differences [40].
                Alternatively, some studies have used reinforcement learning to
                simulate the behavior of real arms
                [https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3577016,
                https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3613904.3642131] or cursors
                [https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3411764.3445514], which give MT or
                velocity as byproduct outcomes of these simulations. Previous studies
                have also shown that users can prioritize speed or accuracy, and that
                MT obtained under any of these strategies conforms to Fitts’ law [39].
                However, there is no model that considers these strategies in advance
                to estimate the distribution of MT. The authors tried to achieve this
                by introducing copulas as a new statistical technique. By analyzing
                existing datasets, they claimed to have successfully modeled the mean
                and standard deviation of MT, the mean and standard deviation of the
                effective task difficulty ID_e, and the throughput (TP) of Fitts’ law.

    Main issue of not self-contained paper, and my decision
    I read this paper multiple times but struggled to understand it. The possible
                reason is that the paper is not self-contained. While it is somewhat
                acceptable for a conference paper to omit details or to say “refer to
                Chapter 1 of a textbook [XYZ]”, the way the authors described how they
                used copulas for data processing is overly simple. It is difficult to
                understand whether these procedures are appropriate. The authors may
                have made an important contribution, but they are not effectively
                conveying it to readers. This prevented me from judging the paper’s
                significance and validity adequately.

    Moreover, as I will explain later, analyzing existing datasets is insufficient to
                judge whether the proposed data analysis method is appropriate. I
                believe the authors need to conduct new experiments. For these
                reasons, I conclude that significant revisions to the paper with
                running new experiments are necessary for acceptance. But it is
                challenging to make a final decision after just one revision, and a
                fresh review of the newly submitted manuscript would be required. Thus
                my current decision is that I cannot agree to include this paper to
                the CHI 2025 proceedings. I hope my review will help the authors in
                revising this paper in the future.

    ## Experiment
    I would like to point out that analyzing the existing datasets does not fully
                achieve the authors’ initial goals. The experiment of JGP dataset did
                not ask participants to operate with shifting their speed-accuracy
                tradeoff. The GO dataset had targets with W=1 pixel, which is unlike
                typical tasks in the HCI field and extremely unrealistic situation
                that rarely occurs in our PC tasks. Considering that W affects W_e
                [39] (and thus affects ID_e) and that W influences MT, it is
                reasonable to think that the GO dataset records performance in a
                highly limited condition. Why did the authors not conduct new user
                experiments to verify the validity of their proposed data analysis
                method?

    So, the reanalysis of existing datasets described in this paper should be regarded
                as a pilot analysis for hypothesis verification. As it stands, this
                paper is a work-in-progress and does not present the thorough research
                results expected at CHI Papers venue. Because I would like the authors
                to run new experiments, I do not recommend a Revise and Resubmit
                decision for this paper. But if the ACs decide to allow it, I would
                encourage the authors to conduct new user experiments during the
                revision period and include the results in the revised manuscript. For
                example, even conducting an experiment with 10 participants using
                three values of D, three values of W, and three strategies (speed-
                emphasis, balanced, accuracy-emphasis) could provide valuable
                insights.

    ## Unclear whether the research goals were achieved
    Regarding the final outcomes, it is unclear whether the initial concerns on prior
                studies were resolved. I understood the initial problems claimed by
                the authors as follows:
    •       Using ID in Fitts’ law can estimate MT with high accuracy, but because
                users do not necessarily adhere strictly to the given accuracy
                (defined by target width W), it does not capture the speed-accuracy
                strategy.
    •       By using the endpoint variance, W_e can captures the speed-accuracy
                strategy, and researchers obtain the adjusted task difficulty ID_e.
                However, this requires using data obtained after the experiment (line
                129).
    •       There is no model that can estimate MT distribution by introducing such a
                speed-accuracy strategy before the experiment.
    However, the proposed model introduces numerous constant values, which were
                determined experimentally. If these numerical values are necessary,
                would not an experiment be required as before? If so, then the initial
                goal has not been achieved. Alternatively, if the authors are aware
                that numerous constant values are necessary, the initial goal setting
                is mismatched, and the authors need to explain the research objectives
                in more detail.

    Or perhaps I am misunderstanding, and as in the study by Do et al.
                [https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3411764.3445514] (see Table 1), is it
                sufficient in the proposed method to simply introduce parameter values
                reported in prior studies?

    ## Validity of mapping strategy to numerical values
    Traditionally, as the authors explained, it was not possible to introduce the
                speed-accuracy strategy into the MT estimation model beforehand.
                Instead, it was necessary to determine ID_e based on data obtained
                after the experiment and fit MT=a+b×ID_e. I believe the reason the
                authors’ proposed method could introduce the speed-accuracy strategy
                into the model is that they mapped the speed-accuracy strategy to
                numerical values between [-1, +1].

    However, if this approach is acceptable, could not we estimate MT using a simpler
                model (though a point estimate) without employing a complex method
                like the authors’? For example, how about a model like MT=a+b×ID+c×S,
                where S is the strategy (taking values from -1 to +1 as in Figure 4)?
                In other words, a model where MT decreases when S takes values like -1
                or -0.5 under speed emphasis. Alternatively, considering that the
                effective movement amplitude hardly changes even if the speed-accuracy
                strategy changes, how about using a model like
                MT=a+b×log2(D/(W−c×S)+1), which affects only the target size term in
                Fitts’ law?

    If mapping the speed-accuracy strategy to numerical values addresses the authors’
                initial problem in this way, it would be a higher priority to verify
                just that effect. The current paper introduces unnecessarily complex
                analysis methods, and it is unclear what specifically solved the
                problem of not being able to introduce the speed-accuracy strategy
                into the MT estimation model beforehand (whether it was the numerical
                mapping of the speed-accuracy strategy, the introduction of copulas,
                or other factors).

    Also, users unconsciously shift their bias toward speed or accuracy
                [https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3373625.3416999]; is the proposed
                method applicable to such a situation where S values cannot be
                predetermined? This is precisely a situation where the speed-accuracy
                strategy can only be obtained a posteriori. If the authors’ method
                allows for estimating MT and ID_e even without prior instructions
                regarding strategy, I would like them to emphasize that more.

    ## Processing time
    As mentioned earlier, I assume that the authors’ research goal might also be
                achievable using reinforcement learning proposed in previous studies.
                However, in reinforcement learning, for example, Do et al.’s method
                took six days of processing time. Could the advantage of the authors’
                method be that processing time is shorter, or that estimation can be
                done with almost no time lag similar to Fitts’ law analysis? If so, I
                would like the authors to emphasize that.


    Finally, please ensure there are no undefined variables. I had to read the paper
                while guessing what they meant, and I could not read it smoothly. For
                example, regarding σ_i and σ_t in Equation 13, I guessed that i refers
                to the “ID_e” component and t refers to the “MT” component. Later, in
                line 763, it finally states “ID_e dimension (μ_i,σ_i)” and “MT
                dimension (μ_t,σ_t)”, which gave me some confidence in this guess.
                However, it is the authors’ responsibility to explain everything.

----------------------------------------------------------------

reviewer review (reviewer 3)

  Expertise

    Knowledgeable

  Originality (Round 1)

    Medium originality

  Significance (Round 1)

    Low significance

  Research Quality (Round 1)

    Low research quality

  Contribution Compared to Length (Round 1)

    The paper length was commensurate with its contribution.

  Figure Descriptions

    The figure descriptions are adequate and follow the accessibility guidelines.

  Recommendation (Round 1)

    I recommend Reject

  Review (Round 1)

    This work proposed three models for pointing tasks, focusing on accounting for
                different speed-accuracy. The idea of this research is novel, however,
                I found these models are not well derived or evaluated. The writing of
                this paper is often unclear and lacks necessary clarifications, making
                it difficult for readers to follow.

    Pros: 
    (1) The motivation for this research is well-developed and clearly explained.
    (2) The perspective on using copulas is valuable.
    (3) Great math proofs.
    (4) The supplementary materials are comprehensive and benefit understanding of the
                main paper.

    Cons:
    (1)  Insufficient clarity: The paper should provide enough information for readers
                to follow the arguments independently.
      (a) For example, on page 2, some notations are defined; however, G and E on page
                5 are not explained. Readers may not follow if they forgot the
                notations from previous work.
      (b) In Section 3, details about the dataset used are unclear. While it is a
                "well-known" dataset, information about the number of unique ID_es and
                total trials is necessary to give readers an overall impression of the
                analysis.

    (2) Lack of rigor and clarity in model derivation:
      (a) Please explain why the log-likelihood is normalized by dividing by the
                maximum log-likelihood across all potential copulas.
      (b) In Section 4, the statement "The previous section investigated the nature of
                the dependence between ID_e and MT for a given strategy" requires
                clarification. Please summarize the findings in Section 3 and clarify
                "nature" before making this claim to enhance clarity.
      (c) In Figure 2, it is clear that rotGumbel performs best. However, in Figure 5
                (left panel), the results are not straightforward: for p1 and p2, t
                seems best, while for p3, t-EV is better. Please clarify the criteria
                used to select the best strategy—specifically, whether it is the mean
                value of the normalized log-likelihood across all participants.
      (d) In Section 4.4, why is the bivariate Gaussian model chosen? You mention it
                fits reasonably well based on the visual appearance of the clusters,
                but this is not rigorous. Was a normality test conducted to assess the
                fit?
      (e)  Page 11, lines 524-525 states that "for many cases, the t-copula actually
                reduces to a Gaussian copula." This raises a question: why not compare
                directly with the Gaussian copula, given that your results suggest it
                reduces to this in most cases, as seen in Figures 2 and 5?

    (3) The evaluation of the model is not clear. Since the model is derived using two
                datasets, it is important to address potential bias. Comparisons using
                the same dataset could lead to misleading conclusions. It is essential
                to compare the model against another publicly available dataset or to
                collect new data through a user study to validate the proposed models.

    At this point, I recommend rejecting this paper as it is not ready for
                publication. However, I am open to discussion and would consider
                recommending a revise and resubmit if other reviewers see potential
                for publication following substantial revisions.


    Minor comments:
    - Page 2, lines 69-70: "obtian(the" – there is a missing space.
    - Page 2, lines 86-87: "thuis" – please correct this typo.
    - Figure 3: The legend covers the distribution.
    - Figures 4, 6, and 7: These do not fit properly on the page.

----------------------------------------------------------------



Comments to Authors (if any):

